README.md, before:

# @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing

A comprehensive event sourcing library built on Effect for TypeScript applications.

## Packages

This monorepo contains the following packages:

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-store](./packages/eventsourcing-store)
Core event sourcing types and storage implementations including SQL and in-memory stores.

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-aggregates](./packages/eventsourcing-aggregates)
Aggregate root patterns for domain-driven design with event sourcing.

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-projections](./packages/eventsourcing-projections)
Read-side projection building from event streams.

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-websocket-transport](./packages/eventsourcing-websocket-transport)
Real-time WebSocket transport for event streaming.

## Installation

```bash
# Install individual packages as needed
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-store
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-aggregates
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-projections
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-websocket-transport
```

## Requirements

All packages require:
- Effect ^3.17.0 as a peer dependency
- TypeScript 5.x

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Bun
- Docker (for running tests with PostgreSQL)

### Setup

```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install
```

### Running Tests

The test suite includes both in-memory and PostgreSQL tests. To run tests:

1. Start the PostgreSQL database:
```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

2. Run tests with environment variables:
```bash
TEST_PG_USERNAME=postgres TEST_PG_PASSWORD=postgres TEST_PG_DATABASE=test TEST_PG_HOST=localhost TEST_PG_PORT=5432 bun run test
```

### Other Commands

```bash
# Build all packages
bun run build

# Lint code
bun run lint

# Type check
bun run check
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

docs: add design philosophy emphasizing Effect's existing APIs
Added clear documentation about the library's core principle of leveraging Effect's
existing APIs rather than creating new abstractions. This ensures developers familiar
with Effect can immediately use the library without learning proprietary patterns.

README.md, after:

# @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing

A comprehensive event sourcing library built on Effect for TypeScript applications.

## Design Philosophy

This library prioritizes leveraging Effect's existing APIs and patterns rather than creating new abstractions. We aim to expose event sourcing capabilities through familiar Effect constructs like `Stream`, `Effect`, `Layer`, and `Schema` - ensuring developers who know Effect can immediately be productive without learning proprietary APIs.

## Packages

This monorepo contains the following packages:

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-store](./packages/eventsourcing-store)

Core event sourcing types and storage implementations including SQL and in-memory stores.

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-aggregates](./packages/eventsourcing-aggregates)

Aggregate root patterns for domain-driven design with event sourcing.

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-projections](./packages/eventsourcing-projections)

Read-side projection building from event streams.

### [@codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-websocket-transport](./packages/eventsourcing-websocket-transport)

Real-time WebSocket transport for event streaming.

## Installation

```bash
# Install individual packages as needed
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-store
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-aggregates
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-projections
npm install @codeforbreakfast/eventsourcing-websocket-transport
```

## Requirements

All packages require:

- Effect ^3.17.0 as a peer dependency
- TypeScript 5.x

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Bun
- Docker (for running tests with PostgreSQL)

### Setup

```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install
```

### Running Tests

The test suite includes both in-memory and PostgreSQL tests. To run tests:

1. Start the PostgreSQL database:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

2. Run tests with environment variables:

```bash
TEST_PG_USERNAME=postgres TEST_PG_PASSWORD=postgres TEST_PG_DATABASE=test TEST_PG_HOST=localhost TEST_PG_PORT=5432 bun run test
```

### Other Commands

```bash
# Build all packages
bun run build

# Lint code
bun run lint

# Type check
bun run check
```

## License

MIT
